# disaster-tweets


The domain of computational social science often grapples with the challenge of laborious and costly labeling processes. To mitigate these constraints, researchers typically resort to labeling a smaller subset of the dataset and subsequently employ algorithmic methods for automating labeling across a larger data set. In this study, I compare various machine learning methods, both traditional and deep-learning based, on a Twitter Disaster data available on Kaggle. The models implemented for this purpose are Support Vector Machine (SVM), and language models like BERT and RoBERTa. These models are evaluated based on various metrics such as accuracy, training time, and ease-of-use, providing a comprehensive insight into their efficacy in the specific application of disaster tweet classification. Furthermore, this study extends its comparison to include OpenAI's ChatGPT, arguably the most well known commercially available language model. Results show that using a language model like BERT and re-training on specific data set, with early-stopping gives the best result with an accuracy of 83.5\% on the test data. Fine-tuning a specific model trained on Twitter data such as Twitter-RoBERTa developed by CardiffNLP gives comparable performance (83\%) with a fraction of the time spent on training. Traditional models like SVM with tf-idf vectorization surprisingly gives 80\% accuracy on test data. This shows that for simpler tasks, traditional models can still be useful since they are easier to use and take less resources for training. Using OpenAI's API, and using gpt3-turbo with 3 examples and a short prompt gives a much lower performance (74.3\%) compared to the other approaches. Based on the experimental results, my recommendation is to use a pre-trained model with fine-tuning for automating labels when an annotated subset is available. Lastly, a deployed model implemented in Flask and deployed to Heroku is available at https://disaster-twitter-7fcb7e8e4a8b.herokuapp.com/

# Deployment

A Flask app is deployed on Heroku. Try it at https://disaster-twitter-7fcb7e8e4a8b.herokuapp.com/